{{Short description|2024 European Union regulation}}
{{Use dmy dates|date=May 2023}}

{{Infobox EU legislation
| number              = (EU) [https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj/eng 2024/1689]
| type                = Regulation
| EEA                 = yes
| title               = Artificial Intelligence Act<ref name="32024R1689"/>
| madeby              = [[European Parliament]] and [[European Council|Council]]
| madeunder           = 
| OJrefurl            = http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj
| OJref               = OJ L, 2024/1689, 12.7.2024
| made                = 
| CouncilVote         = 21 May 2024
| EPVote              = 13 March 2024
| commenced           = 1 August 2024 <!-- Twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union -->
| implementation      = 
| application         = 
| CommProp            = {{CELEX|52021PC0206|text=2021/206}}
| ESCOpin             = 
| CROpin              = 
| ParlOpin            = 
| Reports             = 
| replaces            = 
| amends              = Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 2014/90/EU
| amendedby           = 
| replacedby          = 
| status              = current
}}

The '''Artificial Intelligence Act''' ('''AI Act''')<ref name="32024R1689">{{CELEX|32024R1689|text=Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act)}}</ref> is a [[Regulation (European Union)|European Union regulation]] concerning [[artificial intelligence]] (AI). It establishes a common regulatory and [[legal framework]] for AI within the [[European Union]] (EU).<ref>{{cite web |title=Proposal for a Regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence: Shaping Europe's digital future |url=https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/proposal-regulation-laying-down-harmonised-rules-artificial-intelligence |website=digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu |date=21 April 2021 |access-date=2024-10-06|archive-date=4 January 2023 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20230104120436/https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/proposal-regulation-laying-down-harmonised-rules-artificial-intelligence |url-status=live}}</ref> The regulation entered into force on 1 August 2024,<ref name="ecpressrelease">{{cite press release |date=1 August 2024 |title=AI Act enters into force |url=https://commission.europa.eu/news/ai-act-enters-force-2024-08-01_en |location=Brussels |publisher=[[European Commission]] |access-date=5 August 2024}}</ref> with provisions that shall come into operation gradually over the following 6 to 36 months.<ref>{{Cite web |title=Timeline of Developments |url=https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/developments/ |access-date=2024-07-13 |website=artificialintelligenceact.eu |publisher=Future of Life Institute |language=en-US}}</ref>

It covers most AI systems across a wide range of sectors, with exemptions for AI used only for military, national security, research purposes, or for non-professional use.<ref>{{Cite news |date=9 December 2023 |title=Artificial intelligence act: Council and Parliament strike a deal on the first rules for AI in the world |url=https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2023/12/09/artificial-intelligence-act-council-and-parliament-strike-a-deal-on-the-first-worldwide-rules-for-ai/ |access-date=January 6, 2024 |work=Council of the EU |archive-date=10 January 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240110092304/https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2023/12/09/artificial-intelligence-act-council-and-parliament-strike-a-deal-on-the-first-worldwide-rules-for-ai/ |url-status=live }}</ref> As a form of product regulation, it does not create individual rights; instead, it places duties on AI providers and on organisations that use AI in a professional context.<ref name=":10">{{Cite web |title=EU Artificial Intelligence Act {{!}} Up-to-date developments and analyses of the EU AI Act |url=https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/ |access-date=2025-10-27 |language=en-US}}</ref><ref name=":4">{{Cite web |last=Mueller |first=Benjamin |date=2021-05-04 |title=The Artificial Intelligence Act: A Quick Explainer |url=https://datainnovation.org/2021/05/the-artificial-intelligence-act-a-quick-explainer/ |access-date=2024-01-06 |website=Center for Data Innovation |language=en-US |archive-date=14 October 2022 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20221014172842/http://datainnovation.org/2021/05/the-artificial-intelligence-act-a-quick-explainer/ |url-status=live }}</ref>

The Act classifies non-exempt AI applications by their risk of causing harm. There are four levels – unacceptable, high, limited, minimal – plus an additional category for general-purpose AI.<ref>{{cite journal |last1=Lilkov |first1=Dimitar |title=Regulating artificial intelligence in the EU: A risky game |journal=European View |date=2021 |volume=20 |issue=2 |pages=166–174 |doi=10.1177/17816858211059248 |doi-access=free}}</ref> 

* Applications with unacceptable risks are banned. 
* High-risk applications must comply with security, [[transparency (behavior)|transparency]] and quality obligations, and undergo [[Conformity assessment|conformity assessments]]. 
* Limited-risk applications only have transparency obligations.
* Minimal-risk applications are not regulated. 

For general-purpose AI, transparency requirements are imposed, with reduced requirements for [[open source]] models, and additional evaluations for high-capability models.<ref name=":1">{{Cite web |last=Espinoza |first=Javier |date=December 9, 2023 |title=EU agrees landmark rules on artificial intelligence |url=https://www.ft.com/content/d5bec462-d948-4437-aab1-e6505031a303 |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20231229130308/https://www.ft.com/content/d5bec462-d948-4437-aab1-e6505031a303 |archive-date=29 December 2023 |access-date=2024-01-06 |website=Financial Times}}</ref><ref name=":2">{{Cite news |title=EU AI Act: first regulation on artificial intelligence |url=https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20230601STO93804/eu-ai-act-first-regulation-on-artificial-intelligence |access-date=2024-01-06 |work=European Parliament News |language=en |archive-date=10 January 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240110162551/https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20230601STO93804/eu-ai-act-first-regulation-on-artificial-intelligence |url-status=live }}</ref>

The Act also creates a European Artificial Intelligence Board to promote national cooperation and ensure compliance with the regulation.<ref>{{Cite web|last1=MacCarthy|first1=Mark|last2=Propp |first2=Kenneth |date=2021-05-04 |title=Machines learn that Brussels writes the rules: The EU's new AI regulation |url=https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2021/05/04/machines-learn-that-brussels-writes-the-rules-the-eus-new-ai-regulation/ |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20221027115538/https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2021/05/04/machines-learn-that-brussels-writes-the-rules-the-eus-new-ai-regulation/ |archive-date=27 October 2022 |access-date=2021-09-07 |website=Brookings |language=en-US}}</ref> Like the EU's [[General Data Protection Regulation]], the Act can apply [[Extraterritoriality|extraterritorially]] to providers from outside the EU if they have users within the EU.<ref name=":4" />

Proposed by the [[European Commission]] on 21 April 2021,<ref name="52021PC0206">{{CELEX|52021PC0206|text=Proposal for a Regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence}}</ref> it passed the [[European Parliament]] on 13 March 2024,<ref name="CNBC">{{cite web |date=14 March 2024 |title=World's first major act to regulate AI passed by European lawmakers |url=https://www.cnbc.com/2024/03/13/european-lawmakers-endorse-worlds-first-major-act-to-regulate-ai.html |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240313120308/https://www.cnbc.com/2024/03/13/european-lawmakers-endorse-worlds-first-major-act-to-regulate-ai.html |archive-date=13 March 2024 |access-date=13 March 2024 |work=[[CNBC]]}}</ref> and was unanimously approved by the [[Council of the European Union|EU Council]] on 21 May 2024.<ref name="auto">{{Cite web |last=Browne |first=Ryan |date=2024-05-21 |title=World's first major law for artificial intelligence gets final EU green light |url=https://www.cnbc.com/2024/05/21/worlds-first-major-law-for-artificial-intelligence-gets-final-eu-green-light.html |access-date=2024-05-22 |website=CNBC |language=en |archive-date=21 May 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240521235907/https://www.cnbc.com/2024/05/21/worlds-first-major-law-for-artificial-intelligence-gets-final-eu-green-light.html |url-status=live }}</ref> The draft Act was revised to address the rise in popularity of [[generative artificial intelligence]] systems, such as [[ChatGPT]], whose general-purpose capabilities did not fit the main framework.<ref>{{Cite news |last=Coulter |first=Martin |date=December 7, 2023 |title=What is the EU AI Act and when will regulation come into effect? |url=https://www.reuters.com/technology/what-are-eus-landmark-ai-rules-2023-12-06/ |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20231210214020/https://www.reuters.com/technology/what-are-eus-landmark-ai-rules-2023-12-06/ |archive-date=10 December 2023 |access-date=11 January 2024 |work=Reuters}}</ref>

==Provisions==
=== Risk categories ===
There are different risk categories depending on the type of application, with a specific category dedicated to general-purpose generative AI:

* Unacceptable risk – AI applications in this category are banned, except for [[#Exemptions|specific exemptions]].<ref name="LQDN_technosolutionist_goldrush" /> When no exemption applies, this includes AI applications that [[Manipulation (psychology)|manipulate human behaviour]], those that use real-time remote [[Biometrics|biometric]] identification (such as [[Facial recognition system|facial recognition]]) in public spaces, and those used for [[Social Credit System|social scoring]] (ranking individuals based on their personal characteristics, socio-economic status, or behaviour).<ref name=":2" /><ref>{{Cite web |last=Henning |first=Maximilian |date=2025-08-27 |title=Is your AI trying to make you fall in love with it? |url=https://www.euractiv.com/section/tech/news/is-your-ai-trying-to-make-you-fall-in-love-with-it/ |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250829014004/https://www.euractiv.com/section/tech/news/is-your-ai-trying-to-make-you-fall-in-love-with-it/ |archive-date=2025-08-29 |access-date=2025-09-04 |website=Euractiv |language=en-GB}}</ref>
* High-risk – AI applications that are expected to pose significant threats to health, safety, or the [[fundamental rights]] of persons. Notably, AI systems used in health, education, recruitment, critical infrastructure management, law enforcement or justice. They are subject to quality, transparency, human oversight and safety obligations, and in some cases require a Fundamental Rights Impact Assessment before deployment.<ref name=":11">{{Cite journal|last1=Mantelero|first1=Alessandro|date=2024|title=The Fundamental Rights Impact Assessment (FRIA) in the AI Act: Roots, legal obligations and key elements for a model template|journal=Computer Law & Security Review|language=en|volume=54|article-number=106020 |doi=10.1016/j.clsr.2024.106020| issn=0267-3649|doi-access=free|arxiv=2411.15149}}</ref><ref>{{Citation |last=Mantelero |first=Alessandro |year=2022 |title=Beyond Data. Human Rights, Ethical and Social Impact Assessment in AI |series=Information Technology and Law Series |volume=36 |publisher= Springer-T.M.C. Asser Press |publication-place= The Hague |doi-access=free |doi=10.1007/978-94-6265-531-7 |isbn=978-94-6265-533-1 }}</ref> A Fundamental Rights Impact Assessment (FRIA) is an ex ante review to identify and mitigate potential impacts on fundamental rights before an AI system is deployed.<ref name=":11" /> Earlier work on algorithmic impact assessments has suggested that such tools should identify which individuals and communities are affected by an automated system, describe possible harms, and provide a basis for public and institutional scrutiny of its use.<ref name=":13">{{Cite web|title=Algorithmic Impact Assessments Report: A Practical Framework for Public Agency Accountability|url=https://ainowinstitute.org/publications/algorithmic-impact-assessments-report-2|website=AI Now Institute|date=2018-04-09|access-date=2025-11-29|language=en-US|first=AI Now|last=Institute}}</ref> They must be evaluated both before they are placed on the market and throughout their life cycle. The list of high-risk applications can be expanded over time, without the need to modify the AI Act itself.<ref name=":4" /> Citizens also have a right to submit complaints about AI systems and to receive [[Right to explanation|explanations]] of decisions made by high-risk AI that affect their rights.<ref name="EUParliamentPassage" />
* Limited risk – AI systems in this category have transparency obligations, ensuring users are informed that they are interacting with an AI system and allowing them to make informed choices. This category includes, for example, AI applications that make it possible to generate or manipulate images, sound, or videos (like [[deepfake]]s).<ref name=":2" />
* Minimal risk – This category includes, for example, AI systems used for video games or [[spam filters]]. Most AI applications are expected to fall into this category.<ref>{{Cite web |last=Liboreiro |first=Jorge |date=2021-04-21 |title='Higher risk, stricter rules': EU's new artificial intelligence rules |url=https://www.euronews.com/my-europe/2021/04/21/the-higher-the-risk-the-stricter-the-rule-brussels-new-draft-rules-on-artificial-intellige |access-date=2024-01-06 |website=Euronews |language=en |archive-date=6 January 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240106182629/https://www.euronews.com/my-europe/2021/04/21/the-higher-the-risk-the-stricter-the-rule-brussels-new-draft-rules-on-artificial-intellige |url-status=live }}</ref> These systems are not regulated, and Member States cannot impose additional regulations due to [[maximum harmonisation]] rules. Existing national laws regarding the design or use of such systems are overridden. However, a voluntary code of conduct is suggested.<ref  name=Veale/>
The risk-based scheme follows a product-safety model in which regulatory duties are assigned to the providers and deployers of AI systems, and these duties become more demanding as the potential impact on health, safety, or fundamental rights increases. This structure is meant to ensure that oversight focuses on systems likely to create significant risks while allowing lighter approaches for uses considered less sensitive.<ref name=":14">{{Cite web|url=https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_BRI(2021)698792|title=Artificial intelligence act: EU Legislation in Progress|access-date=2025-11-29|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20251005152514/https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_BRI(2021)698792|archive-date=2025-10-05}}</ref> Some legal scholars also argue that, in practice, the Act frames "trustworthy AI" as systems that can show compliance with these safety and risk thresholds.<ref name=":15">{{Cite journal|title=Trustworthy artificial intelligence and the European Union AI act: On the conflation of trustworthiness and acceptability of risk|url=https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/rego.12512|journal=Regulation & Governance|date=2024|issn=1748-5991|pmc=10903109|pmid=38435808|pages=3–32|volume=18|issue=1|doi=10.1111/rego.12512|language=en|first=Johann|last=Laux|first2=Sandra|last2=Wachter|first3=Brent|last3=Mittelstadt}}</ref> According to an initial appraisal by the European Parliamentary Research Service, the Commission's impact assessment drew on stakeholder consultations and a wide range of existing research when comparing policy options for this risk-based framework.<ref name=":16">{{Cite web|url=https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_BRI(2021)694212|title=Artificial intelligence act: Initial Appraisal of a European Commission Impact Assessment|access-date=2025-11-29|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250219063710/https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_BRI(2021)694212|archive-date=2025-02-19}}</ref>

Added in 2023, the general-purpose AI category includes [[foundation model]]s (for example, ChatGPT) that can perform a wide range of tasks. If a model's weights and design are made open source, developers must publish a training data summary and a copyright policy; closed-source models must meet broader transparency requirements. High-impact models that pose systemic risks (require more than 10<sup>25</sup> [[FLOPS|floating-point operations]] to train)<ref name=":3">{{Cite web |last=Bertuzzi|first=Luca|date=2023-12-07|title=AI Act: EU policymakers nail down rules on AI models, butt heads on law enforcement|url=https://www.euractiv.com/section/artificial-intelligence/news/ai-act-eu-policymakers-nail-down-rules-on-ai-models-butt-heads-on-law-enforcement/|access-date=2024-01-06|website=Euractiv|language=en-GB|archive-date=8 January 2024|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240108215257/https://www.euractiv.com/section/artificial-intelligence/news/ai-act-eu-policymakers-nail-down-rules-on-ai-models-butt-heads-on-law-enforcement/|url-status=live}}</ref> must undergo extra evaluation.<ref name=":10" /><ref name=":2" /> A [[General-Purpose AI Code of Practice]], published on 10 July 2025, outlines three main chapters on transparency, copyright, and safety and security to help providers demonstrate compliance with the AI Act. Participation in the code is voluntary.<ref>{{Cite web |title=The General-Purpose AI Code of Practice {{!}} Shaping Europe’s digital future|url=https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/contents-code-gpai|access-date=2025-10-27|website=digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu|language=en}}</ref>

Beyond these basic transparency duties, the Act sets a common list of obligations for providers of general-purpose AI models. They must publish a summary of the training data, adopt a policy to comply with copyright law, and provide technical documentation to downstream providers and supervisory authorities. Models that are designated as posing systemic risk must also carry out model evaluations and adversarial testing, assess and mitigate risks such as bias and security failures, report serious incidents, and ensure an adequate level of cybersecurity.<ref name=":17">{{Cite web|title=General-purpose AI regulation and the European Union AI Act|url=https://policyreview.info/articles/analysis/general-purpose-ai-regulation-and-ai-act|website=policyreview.info|date=2024-08-01|access-date=2025-11-29|first=Gstrein J.|last=Oskar|last2=Haleem|last3=Zwitter|first2=Noman|first3=Andrej}}</ref>

===Exemptions===
Articles 2.3 and 2.6 exempt AI systems used for [[Artificial intelligence#Military|military]] or [[Artificial intelligence in government|national security]] purposes or pure scientific research and development from the AI Act.<ref name="LQDN_technosolutionist_goldrush" /> In particular, the Regulation does not apply where AI systems are used exclusively for military, defence or national security purposes, or to systems developed and put into service solely for scientific research and development; if such systems are later used for other purposes (for example, civilian or law-enforcement uses), the Act applies.<ref name="32024R1689" /> These activities remain governed by separate EU and national rules on defence, security, and intelligence rather than by the AI Act itself.<ref name=":18">{{Cite web|url=https://cetas.turing.ac.uk/publications/eu-ai-act-national-security-implications|title=The EU AI Act: National Security Implications|date=31 July 2024|access-date=2025-11-29|last=Powell|first=Rosamund|website=The Alan Turing Institute {{!}} Center for Emerging Technology and Security}}</ref>

Article 5.2 bans algorithmic video surveillance of people ("The use of 'real-time' remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces"<ref>{{Cite web |title=Article 5: Prohibited AI Practices |url=https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/article/5/ |access-date=2025-05-02 |website=artificialintelligenceact.eu |language=en-US}}</ref>) only if it is conducted in real time. Exceptions allowing real-time algorithmic video surveillance include policing aims including "a real and present or real and foreseeable threat of terrorist attack".<ref name="LQDN_technosolutionist_goldrush">{{cite Q|Q126064181|url-status=live}}</ref>

Recital 31 of the Act states that it aims to prohibit "AI systems providing social scoring of natural persons by public or private actors", but allows for "lawful evaluation practices of natural persons that are carried out for a specific purpose in accordance with Union and national law."{{refn|Artificial Intelligence Act:<ref name="32024R1689"/> Recital 31}} [[La Quadrature du Net]] interprets this exemption as permitting sector-specific social scoring systems,<ref name="LQDN_technosolutionist_goldrush" /> such as the suspicion score used by the French family payments agency [[Caisse d'allocations familiales]].<ref name="LQDN_notation_CAF">{{cite Q|Q126066451|url-status=live}}</ref><ref name="LQDN_technosolutionist_goldrush" />

=== Governance ===
The AI Act establishes various new bodies in Article 64 and the following articles. These bodies are tasked with implementing and enforcing the Act. The approach combines EU-level coordination with national implementation, involving both public authorities and private sector participation.

The following new bodies will be established:<ref>{{Cite news |last=Bertuzzi |first=Luca |date=November 21, 2023 |title=EU lawmakers to discuss AI rulebook's revised governance structure |url=https://www.euractiv.com/section/artificial-intelligence/news/eu-lawmakers-to-discuss-ai-rulebooks-revised-governance-structure/ |work=Euractiv |access-date=18 April 2024 |archive-date=22 May 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240522124047/https://www.euractiv.com/section/artificial-intelligence/news/eu-lawmakers-to-discuss-ai-rulebooks-revised-governance-structure/ |url-status=live }}</ref><ref name=":7">{{Cite journal |last1=Friedl |first1=Paul |last2=Gasiola |first2=Gustavo Gil |date=2024-02-07 |title=Examining the EU's Artificial Intelligence Act |url=https://verfassungsblog.de/examining-the-eus-artificial-intelligence-act/ |journal=Verfassungsblog |doi=10.59704/789d6ad759d0a40b |language=en-GB |access-date=16 April 2024 |archive-date=22 May 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240522124123/https://verfassungsblog.de/examining-the-eus-artificial-intelligence-act/ |url-status=live }}</ref>

# AI Office: attached to the European Commission, this authority will coordinate the implementation of the AI Act in all Member States and oversee the compliance of general-purpose AI providers. It can also request information or open investigations when serious issues are suspected.<ref name=":10" /> 
# European Artificial Intelligence Board: composed of one representative from each Member State, the Board will advise and assist the Commission and Member States to facilitate the consistent and effective application of the AI Act. Its tasks include gathering and sharing technical and regulatory expertise, providing recommendations, written opinions, and other advice.
# Advisory Forum: established to advise and provide technical expertise to the Board and the Commission, this forum will represent a balanced selection of stakeholders, including industry, start-ups, small and medium-sized enterprises, civil society, and academia, ensuring that a broad spectrum of opinions is represented during the implementation and application process.
# Scientific Panel of Independent Experts: this panel will provide technical advice and input to the AI Office and national authorities, enforce rules for general-purpose AI models (notably by launching qualified alerts of possible risks to the AI Office), and ensure that the rules and implementations of the AI Act correspond to the latest scientific findings.

While the establishment of new bodies is planned at the EU level, Member States will have to designate "national competent authorities."{{refn|group=note|Defined in the regulation<ref name="32024R1689"/> in Article 3, §48: "'national competent authority' means a notifying authority or a market surveillance authority; as regards AI systems put into service or used by Union institutions, agencies, offices and bodies, references to national competent authorities or market surveillance authorities in this Regulation shall be construed as references to the European Data Protection Supervisor"}} These authorities will be responsible for ensuring the application and implementation of the AI Act, and for conducting "market surveillance."<ref>{{Cite web |date=12 December 2023 |title=Artificial Intelligence – Questions and Answers |url=https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_21_1683 |access-date=2024-04-17 |website=European Commission |archive-date=6 April 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240406232525/https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/QANDA_21_1683 |url-status=live }}</ref> They will verify that AI systems comply with the regulations, notably by checking the proper performance of conformity assessments and by appointing third-parties to carry out external conformity assessments.

Once harmonised standards for the AI Act are published in the Official Journal, compliant products are presumed to conform with the regulation; these standards are being drafted by CEN/CENELEC Joint Technical Committee 21 (JTC 21).<ref>{{Cite web |title=Artificial Intelligence |url=https://www.cencenelec.eu/areas-of-work/cen-cenelec-topics/artificial-intelligence |access-date=2025-10-27 |website=CEN-CENELEC}}</ref>

=== Enforcement ===
The Act regulates entry to the [[EU internal market]] using the [[New Legislative Framework]]. It contains essential requirements that all AI systems must meet to access the EU market. These essential requirements are passed on to [[European Standardisation Organisations]], which develop technical standards that further detail these requirements.<ref>{{Cite journal |last=Tartaro |first=Alessio |date=2023 |title=Regulating by standards: current progress and main challenges in the standardisation of Artificial Intelligence in support of the AI Act |url=https://universitypress.unisob.na.it/ojs/index.php/ejplt/article/view/1792 |journal=European Journal of Privacy Law and Technologies |volume=1 |issue=1 |via= |access-date=10 December 2023 |archive-date=3 December 2023 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20231203233559/https://universitypress.unisob.na.it/ojs/index.php/ejplt/article/view/1792 |url-status=live }}</ref> These standards are developed by CEN/CENELEC JTC 21.<ref>{{Cite web |date=2023-04-25 |title=With the AI Act, we need to mind the standards gap |url=https://www.ceps.eu/with-the-ai-act-we-need-to-mind-the-standards-gap/ |access-date=2024-09-15 |website=CEPS |language=en-GB}}</ref>

The Act mandates that member states establish their own notifying bodies. Conformity assessments are conducted to verify whether AI systems comply with the standards set out in the AI Act.<ref>{{CELEX|52021SC0084|text=COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT IMPACT ASSESSMENT Accompanying the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council LAYING DOWN HARMONISED RULES ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACT) AND AMENDING CERTAIN UNION LEGISLATIVE ACTS}}</ref> This assessment can be done in two ways: either through self-assessment, where the AI system provider checks conformity, or through third-party conformity assessment, where the notifying body conducts the assessment.<ref  name=Veale>{{Cite journal |last1=Veale |first1=Michael |last2=Borgesius |first2=Frederik Zuiderveen |date=2021-08-01 |title=Demystifying the Draft EU Artificial Intelligence Act — Analysing the good, the bad, and the unclear elements of the proposed approach |journal=Computer Law Review International |language=en |volume=22 |issue=4 |pages=97–112 |doi=10.9785/cri-2021-220402 |arxiv=2107.03721 |s2cid=235765823 |issn=2194-4164}}</ref> Notifying bodies also have the authority to carry out audits to ensure proper conformity assessments.<ref>{{Cite journal |last=Casarosa |first=Federica |date=2022-06-01 |title=Cybersecurity certification of Artificial Intelligence: a missed opportunity to coordinate between the Artificial Intelligence Act and the Cybersecurity Act |journal=International Cybersecurity Law Review |language=en |volume=3 |issue=1 |pages=115–130 |doi=10.1365/s43439-021-00043-6 |s2cid=258697805 |issn=2662-9739|hdl=1814/77775 |hdl-access=free }}</ref>

Each EU Member State must also designate a national supervisory authority to monitor compliance, handle complaints, and share information with the European AI Office, which coordinates enforcement across the Union.<ref name=":10" />

Together, these actors form a multi-level supervision system. National market surveillance and supervisory authorities carry out checks and enforce the rules on high-risk AI systems and other regulated uses, while EU-level bodies such as the AI Office and the European Artificial Intelligence Board support implementation of the Act and help ensure consistent application, in particular for general-purpose AI models.<ref name=":14" />

Criticism has arisen regarding the fact that many high-risk AI systems do not require third-party conformity assessments.<ref>{{cite SSRN |last1=Smuha |first1=Nathalie A. |last2=Ahmed-Rengers |first2=Emma |last3=Harkens |first3=Adam |last4=Li |first4=Wenlong |last5=MacLaren |first5=James |last6=Piselli |first6=Riccardo |last7=Yeung |first7=Karen |date=2021-08-05 |title=How the EU Can Achieve Legally Trustworthy AI: A Response to the European Commission's Proposal for an Artificial Intelligence Act |ssrn=3899991}}</ref><ref>{{Cite journal |last1=Ebers |first1=Martin |last2=Hoch |first2=Veronica R. S. |last3=Rosenkranz |first3=Frank |last4=Ruschemeier |first4=Hannah |last5=Steinrötter |first5=Björn |date=December 2021 |title=The European Commission's Proposal for an Artificial Intelligence Act—A Critical Assessment by Members of the Robotics and AI Law Society (RAILS) |journal=J: Multidisciplinary Scientific Journal |language=en |volume=4 |issue=4 |pages=589–603 |doi=10.3390/j4040043 |issn=2571-8800 |doi-access=free }}</ref><ref name=":12">{{Cite SSRN |last1=Almada |first1=Marco |last2=Petit |first2=Nicolas |title=The EU AI Act: Between Product Safety and Fundamental Rights |ssrn=4308072 | date=27 October 2023}}</ref> Some commentators argue that independent third-party assessments are necessary for high-risk AI systems to ensure safety before deployment. Legal scholars have suggested that AI systems capable of generating deepfakes for political misinformation or creating non-consensual intimate imagery should be classified as high-risk and subjected to stricter regulation.<ref>{{cite journal |last=Romero-Moreno |first=Felipe |date=29 March 2024 |title=Generative AI and deepfakes: a human rights approach to tackling harmful content |journal=International Review of Law, Computers & Technology |volume=39 |issue=2 |pages=297–326|doi-access=free |doi=10.1080/13600869.2024.2324540 |issn=1360-0869 |hdl-access=free |hdl=2299/20431}}</ref> However, the Act does not explicitly mandate specific deepfake detection mechanisms, nor does it comprehensively address the broader human rights implications stemming from the proliferation of such synthetic media.<ref>{{cite journal |last=Romero-Moreno |first=Felipe |date=23 June 2025 |title=Deepfake detection in generative AI: A legal framework proposal to protect human rights |journal=Computer Law & Security Review |volume=58 |article-number=106162 |doi-access=free |doi=10.1016/j.clsr.2025.106162}}</ref>

==== Penalties ====
Non-compliance with the prohibitions in Article 5 is subject to administrative fines of up to EUR 35,000,000 or, if the offender is an undertaking, up to 7% of its total worldwide annual turnover, whichever is higher. Other operator obligations may be sanctioned with fines of up to EUR 15,000,000 or 3% of worldwide annual turnover, whichever is higher; providing incorrect, incomplete or misleading information may be fined up to EUR 7,500,000 or 1% of worldwide annual turnover. For SMEs, including start-ups, the applicable cap is the lower of the relevant percentage or the fixed amount. For providers of general-purpose AI models, the Commission may impose separate fines up to EUR 15,000,000 or 3% of worldwide annual turnover in the specific cases listed in Article 101.<ref name="32024R1689" />

=== Regulatory sandboxes ===
The Act provides for "regulatory sandboxes", i.e., controlled testing environments run by national competent authorities, where developers can trial AI systems under supervision before placing them on the market, to support innovation while maintaining safeguards. Member States are encouraged to set up such sandboxes under coordinated EU rules, and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and start-ups may receive priority access to test systems in a compliant setting.<ref>{{Cite news |title=Artificial intelligence act and regulatory sandboxes {{!}} Think Tank {{!}} European Parliament |url=https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_BRI(2022)733544 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20251003225534/https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_BRI(2022)733544 |archive-date=2025-10-03 |access-date=2025-10-27 |language=en}}</ref>

== Legislative procedure ==
{{further|European Union legislative procedure}}
In February 2020, the [[European Commission]] published "White Paper on Artificial Intelligence – A European approach to excellence and trust".<ref>{{Cite web |date=2020-02-19 |title=White Paper on Artificial Intelligence – a European approach to excellence and trust |url=https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/consultations/white-paper-artificial-intelligence-european-approach-excellence-and-trust |access-date=2024-01-06 |website= |publisher=[[European Commission]] |language=en |archive-date=5 January 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240105090033/https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/consultations/white-paper-artificial-intelligence-european-approach-excellence-and-trust |url-status=live }}</ref> In October 2020, debates between EU leaders took place in the [[European Council]]. On 21 April 2021, the AI Act was officially proposed by the Commission.<ref name="52021PC0206"/> On 6 December 2022, the European Council adopted the general orientation, allowing negotiations to begin with the [[European Parliament]]. On 9 December 2023, after three days of "marathon" talks, the [[Council of the European Union|EU Council]] and Parliament concluded an agreement.<ref>{{CELEX|32024R1689|tab=HIS|text=Procedure 2021/0106/COD}}</ref><ref>{{Cite web |date=9 December 2023|title=Timeline – Artificial intelligence |url=https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/artificial-intelligence/timeline-artificial-intelligence/ |access-date=6 January 2024 |publisher=[[European Council]] |archive-date=6 January 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240106182627/https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/artificial-intelligence/timeline-artificial-intelligence/ |url-status=live}}</ref>

The law was passed in the European Parliament on 13 March 2024, when MEPs adopted the final text in plenary session by a vote of 523 for, 46 against, and 49 abstaining.<ref name=EUParliamentPassage>{{Cite web |date=2024-03-13 |title=Artificial Intelligence Act: MEPs adopt landmark law |url=https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20240308IPR19015/artificial-intelligence-act-meps-adopt-landmark-law |access-date=2024-03-14 |website=European Parliament |language=en |archive-date=15 March 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240315034359/https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20240308IPR19015/artificial-intelligence-act-meps-adopt-landmark-law |url-status=live }}</ref> It was approved by the EU Council on 21 May 2024.<ref name="auto"/> It entered into force on 1 August 2024,<ref name="ecpressrelease"/> 20 days after being published in the ''[[Official Journal of the European Union|Official Journal]]'' on 12 July 2024.<ref name="CNBC"/><ref name=":0">{{Cite web |last=David |first=Emilia |date=2023-12-14 |title=The EU AI Act passed — now comes the waiting |url=https://www.theverge.com/2023/12/14/24001919/eu-ai-act-foundation-models-regulation-data |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240110235258/https://www.theverge.com/2023/12/14/24001919/eu-ai-act-foundation-models-regulation-data |archive-date=10 January 2024 |access-date=2024-01-06 |website=The Verge |language=en}}</ref> After coming into force, there will be a delay before it becomes applicable, which depends on the type of application. This delay is 6 months for bans on "unacceptable risk" AI systems, 9 months for codes of practice, 12 months for general-purpose AI systems, 36 months for some obligations related to "high-risk" AI systems, and 24 months for everything else.<ref name=":0" /><ref name=EUParliamentPassage/>

Legal commentators have described the AI Act as a first-of-its-kind, comprehensive framework for regulating AI across multiple sectors, and as a likely reference point for companies and regulators outside the EU when they design their own approaches to AI governance.<ref name=":19">{{Cite web|title=The First of its Kind: the EU AI Act and What it Means for the Future of AI|url=https://news.law.fordham.edu/jcfl/2024/04/23/the-first-of-its-kind-the-eu-ai-act-and-what-it-means-for-the-future-of-ai/|date=2024-04-23|access-date=2025-11-29|language=en-US|website=Fordham Journal of Corporate and Financial Law}}</ref>

==Reactions==
Experts have argued that though the jurisdiction of the law is European, it could have far-ranging implications for international companies that plan to expand to Europe.<ref name=":5">{{Cite web |date=2023-12-11 |title=Europe agreed on world-leading AI rules. How do they work and will they affect people everywhere? |url=https://apnews.com/article/eu-ai-act-artificial-intelligence-regulation-0283a10a891a24703068edcae3d60deb |access-date=2024-05-31 |website=AP News |language=en}}</ref> [[Anu Bradford]] at [[Columbia University|Columbia]] has argued that the law provides significant momentum to the world-wide movement to regulate AI technologies.<ref name=":5" /> 

[[Amnesty International]] stated that, while EU policymakers present the AI Act as a global model for AI regulation, the legislation fails to take basic human rights principles into account and offers only limited protections to impacted and marginalised people. It argued that the Act does not ban the reckless use and export of what it calls "draconian AI technologies", fails to ensure equal protection for migrants, refugees and asylum seekers, and lacks adequate accountability and transparency provisions, which in its view risks exacerbating human rights abuses.<ref>{{Cite web|title=EU: Artificial Intelligence rulebook fails to stop proliferation of abusive technologies|url=https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2024/03/eu-artificial-intelligence-rulebook-fails-to-stop-proliferation-of-abusive-technologies/|website=Amnesty International|date=2024-03-13|access-date=2025-11-29|language=en}}</ref> 

Some tech watchdogs have argued that there were major loopholes in the law that would allow large tech monopolies to entrench their advantage in AI, or to lobby to weaken rules.<ref>{{Cite web |title=EU parliament greenlights landmark artificial intelligence regulations |url=https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/3/13/eu-parliament-greenlights-landmark-artificial-intelligence-regulations |access-date=2024-05-31 |website=Al Jazeera |language=en}}</ref><ref name=":6" /> Some startups welcomed the clarification the Act provides, while others argued the additional regulation would make European startups uncompetitive compared to American and Chinese startups.<ref name=":6">{{Cite web |date=2024-03-16 |title=The EU passed the first AI law. Tech experts say it's 'bittersweet' |url=https://www.euronews.com/next/2024/03/16/eu-ai-act-reaction-tech-experts-say-the-worlds-first-ai-law-is-historic-but-bittersweet |access-date=2024-05-31 |website=euronews |language=en}}</ref> Legal analysis has also suggested that, while the Act may serve as an early reference point for AI governance frameworks, its detailed requirements could add significant compliance complexity for providers operating across multiple jurisdictions.<ref name=":19" /> [[La Quadrature du Net]] (LQDN) described the AI Act as "tailor-made for the tech industry, European police forces as well as other large bureaucracies eager to automate social control." LQDN described the role of self-regulation and exemptions in the Act to render it "largely incapable of standing in the way of the social, political and environmental damage linked to the proliferation of AI."<ref name="LQDN_technosolutionist_goldrush" /> In light of environmental concerns, some scholars have also argued that the Act’s high-risk categorization framework fails to account for the environmental impacts of AI systems, including the energy consumption and resource demands associated with large-scale model training and deployment.<ref name=":20">{{Cite journal |last=Pagallo |first=Ugo |date=2025-02-03 |title=On Twelve Shades of Green: Assessing the Levels of Environmental Protection in the Artificial Intelligence Act |url=https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-025-09713-4 |journal=Minds and Machines |language=en |volume=35 |issue=1 |pages=10 |doi=10.1007/s11023-025-09713-4 |issn=1572-8641|doi-access=free }}</ref> They contend that by focusing primarily on fundamental rights and product safety risks, the regulation overlooks sustainability concerns and the climate implications of expanding AI infrastructures.<ref name=":20" /> Commentary on national security has also noted that the Act's sectoral exclusion for security and defense sits alongside separate security frameworks, raising questions about how these exemptions will interact with future security and defense policy.<ref name=":18" /> Academic commentary has described the Act as a "medley" of product-safety and fundamental-rights frameworks and has also cautioned that its product-safety approach relies heavily on provider self-assessment, raising concerns about effective enforcement.<ref name="Veale" /><ref name=":12" /> An initial appraisal of the Commission's impact assessment by the European Parliamentary Research Service likewise noted that much of the analysis is qualitative and that some estimates, including for compliance costs under the different options, depend on modelling assumptions and available evidence.<ref name=":16" /> Some scholars also note that linking "trustworthy AI" to compliance with these risk thresholds can make the underlying policy choices about what levels of risk are acceptable less visible.<ref name=":15" /> Separate proposals for algorithmic impact assessments, such as a framework developed by the [[AI Now Institute]] for public agencies, argue that impact assessments should map affected communities, examine fairness, bias and due process, and allow ongoing public and researcher scrutiny of automated decision systems.<ref name=":13" />

A broad civil society coalition coordinated by [[European Digital Rights]] (EDRi) published a joint analysis comparing the final AI Act with its earlier demands and concluded that the law falls short of what is needed to protect rights to privacy, equality, non-discrimination and the presumption of innocence. The coalition also called for stronger safeguards for people on the move and for people with disabilities, arguing that the final rules leave significant gaps in these areas.<ref>{{Cite web|title=EU’s AI Act fails to set gold standard for human rights|url=https://edri.org/our-work/eu-ai-act-fails-to-set-gold-standard-for-human-rights/|website=European Digital Rights (EDRi)|access-date=2025-11-29|language=en-US}}</ref>

Organisations representing authors, performers, publishers and producers have also criticised the implementation of the Act, particularly its rules for general-purpose AI. A joint statement from 38 global creators' organisations, reported by ''[[Le Monde]]'', argued that the Code of Practice, the guidelines for general-purpose AI and the template for training-data summaries under Article 53 do not adequately protect intellectual property rights or ensure sufficient transparency about the data used to train generative AI models, describing the outcome as a missed opportunity to deliver on the Act's stated goals. This criticism has been discussed as part of wider debates about how the AI Act and its general-purpose AI provisions may affect the position of cultural and creative industries in the EU.<ref>{{Cite news|title=AI Act: 38 global creators' organizations condemn 'betrayal' of Europe's stated goals|url=https://www.lemonde.fr/en/economy/article/2025/08/02/ai-act-38-global-creators-organizations-condemn-betrayal-of-europe-s-stated-goals_6744006_19.html|date=2025-08-02|access-date=2025-11-30|language=en|work=Le Monde}}</ref>

Building on these critiques, scholars have raised concerns in particular about the Act's approach to regulating the secondary uses of trained AI models, which may have significant societal impacts.<ref name=":8">{{Cite journal |last1=Mühlhoff |first1=Rainer |last2=Ruschemeier |first2=Hannah |date=2024 |title=Regulating AI with Purpose Limitation for Models |url=https://aire.lexxion.eu/article/AIRE/2024/1/5 |journal=Journal of AI Law and Regulation |language=en |volume=1 |issue=1 |pages=24–39 |doi=10.21552/aire/2024/1/5}}</ref><ref name=":9">{{Cite web |last1=Muehlhoff |first1=Rainer |last2=Ruschmeier |first2=Hannah |date=2024 |title=Updating Purpose Limitation for AI: A Normative Approach from Law and Philosophy. |ssrn=4711621 |url=https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4711621}}</ref> They argue that the Act's narrow focus on deployment contexts and reliance on providers to self-declare intended purposes creates opportunities for misinterpretation and insufficient oversight.<ref name=":9" /> Additionally, the Act often exempts [[Open-source artificial intelligence|open-source]] models and neglects critical lifecycle phases, such as the reuse of trained models.<ref name=":8" /> Trained models store decision-mappings as parameters that approximate patterns from the [[training data]]. This "model data" is distinct from the original training data and is typically classified as non-personal, as it often cannot be traced back to individual data subjects. Consequently, it falls outside the scope of other regulations like the [[General Data Protection Regulation|GDPR]].<ref name=":8" /> Some scholars also criticize the AI Act for not sufficiently regulating the reuse of model data, warning of potentially harmful consequences for individual privacy, social equity, and democratic processes.<ref name=":8" /> Other commentators have also questioned the democratic legitimacy, transparency, and practical enforceability of the new rules for general-purpose AI, noting that their impact will depend on how oversight bodies apply them over time.<ref name=":17" />

Legal scholars have argued that compliance-based frameworks such as the EU AI Act may be insufficient to prevent harm, as optimizing systems can satisfy formal requirements while producing prohibited outcomes — a phenomenon described as the 'Synthetic Outlaw' problem, in which the gap between nominal compliance and actual impact remains ungoverned.<ref>{{cite web |last=Gropper |first=Jonathan |title=The Synthetic Outlaw: How AI Breaks Governance Without Trying |website=CommonWealth Magazine |date=2026-02-16 |url=https://english.cw.com.tw/article/article.action?id=4624 |access-date=2026-02-17}}</ref>

== See also ==
* [[Algorithmic bias]]
* {{Annotated link|Artificial intelligence and elections}}
* [[Ethics of artificial intelligence]]
* [[European Artificial Intelligence Office]]
* [[Existential risk from artificial general intelligence]]
* [[Regulation of algorithms]]
* [[Regulation of artificial intelligence in the European Union]]

==Notes==
{{reflist|group=note}}

== References ==
{{reflist}}

{{Artificial intelligence navbox|state=collapsed}}
{{Existential risk from artificial intelligence|state=collapsed}}
{{Subject bar|auto=yes|portal1=2020s|portal2=European Union|portal3=Law|portal4=Politics|portal5=Technology}}
{{Authority control}}

[[Category:European Digital Strategy]]
[[Category:2021 in law]]
[[Category:2021 in the European Union]]
[[Category:2024 in law]]
[[Category:2024 in politics]]
[[Category:Data laws of Europe]]
[[Category:European Union regulations]]
[[Category:Regulation of robots]]
[[Category:Regulation of artificial intelligence]]
[[Category:2024 in computing]]