{{Short description|UK law to regulate online content}}
{{Use British English|date=July 2025}}
{{Use dmy dates|date=February 2026}}
{{for|other similarly named laws|Online Safety Act (disambiguation)}}
{{Infobox UK legislation
| short_title = Online Safety Act 2023{{efn|Section 241.}}
| type = Act
| parliament = Parliament of the United Kingdom
| long_title = An Act to make provision for and in connection with the regulation by Ofcom of certain internet services; for and in connection with communications offences; and for connected purposes.
| year = 2023
| citation = [[List of Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 2023|2023]] c. 50
| introduced_commons = [[Michelle Donelan]], [[Secretary of State for Science, Innovation and Technology]]
| introduced_lords = [[Stephen Parkinson, Baron Parkinson of Whitley Bay|Lord Parkinson of Whitley Bay]], [[Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Arts and Heritage]]
| territorial_extent = [[United Kingdom]] (most parts) <br/> [[Great Britain]] (certain parts){{efn|Section 239.}}
| royal_assent = 26 October 2023
| commencement = On royal assent and by regulations.{{efn|Section 240.}}
| repeal_date = 
| amends = {{ubli|[[Criminal Attempts Act 1981]]|[[Malicious Communications Act 1988]]|[[Football Spectators Act 1989]]|[[Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1992]]|[[Communications Act 2003]]|[[Crime and Courts Act 2013]]|[[Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015]]|[[Modern Slavery Act 2015]]|[[Domestic Abuse Act 2021]]|[[Elections Act 2022]]}}
| amendments = {{ubli|[[Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024]]|[[Media Act 2024]]|[[Data (Use and Access) Act 2025]]|[[Online Safety Act 2023 (Priority Offences) (Amendment) Regulations 2025]]}}
| repealing_legislation = 
| related_legislation = 
| status = Amended
| legislation_history = https://bills.parliament.uk/bills/3137
| original_text = https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2023/50/contents/enacted
| revised_text = https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2023/50/contents
| use_new_UK-LEG = yes
}}

The '''Online Safety Act 2023'''<ref name="OSA">{{Cite web|url=https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2023/50/contents/enacted|title=Online Safety Act 2023|website=www.legislation.gov.uk}}</ref><ref>{{Cite news |last=Landi |first=Martyn |date=26 October 2023 |title=Online Safety Act becomes law in the UK |work=The Independent |url=https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/ofcom-parliament-suella-braverman-government-bill-b2436485.html |access-date=27 October 2023 |archive-date=27 October 2023 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20231027021344/https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/ofcom-parliament-suella-braverman-government-bill-b2436485.html |url-status=live }}</ref><ref>{{Cite web |date=27 October 2023 |title=Online Safety Act 2023 |url=https://bills.parliament.uk/bills/3137 |access-date=27 October 2023 |website=UK Parliament}}</ref> ('''OSA''') (c. 50) is an [[Act of Parliament (United Kingdom)|act]] of the [[Parliament of the United Kingdom]] to regulate online content. It was passed on 26 October 2023 and gives the relevant [[Secretary of State (United Kingdom)|secretary of state]] the power to designate, suppress, and record a wide range of online content that they deem illegal or harmful to children.<ref>{{Cite news |date=26 October 2023 |title=Online Safety Bill: Beefed up internet rules become law |author-first1=Imran|author-last1=Rahman-Jones|author-first2=Chris|author-last2=Vallance|work=BBC News |url=https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-67221691 |access-date=26 October 2023 |archive-date=26 October 2023 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20231026143833/https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-67221691 |url-status=live }}</ref><ref>{{Cite web |last=Porter |first=Jon |date=26 October 2023 |title=The UK's controversial Online Safety Bill finally becomes law |url=https://www.theverge.com/2023/10/26/23922397/uk-online-safety-bill-law-passed-royal-assent-moderation-regulation |access-date=26 October 2023 |website=The Verge |archive-date=26 October 2023 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20231026143826/https://www.theverge.com/2023/10/26/23922397/uk-online-safety-bill-law-passed-royal-assent-moderation-regulation |url-status=live }}</ref>

The act creates a new [[duty of care]] for online platforms, requiring them to take action against illegal content, or legal content that could be harmful to children where children are likely to access it. Platforms failing this duty would be liable to fines of up to £18&nbsp;million or 10% of their annual turnover, whichever is higher. It also empowers [[Ofcom]] to block access to particular websites. However, it obliges large [[social media]] platforms not to remove, and to preserve access to, journalistic or "democratically important" content such as user comments on political parties and issues. 

The act also requires platforms – including [[end-to-end encrypted]] message providers – to scan for [[child pornography]] and terrorism content, which experts say is not possible to implement without undermining users' privacy.<ref name="yahoo">{{Cite news |last=Lomas |first=Natasha |date=6 September 2023 |title=Ministerial statement on UK's Online Safety Bill seen as steering out of encryption clash |url=https://techcrunch.com/2023/09/06/osb-encryption-scanning-feasibility/ |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20230928104231/https://techcrunch.com/web/20230928104231/https://techcrunch.com/2023/09/06/osb-encryption-scanning-feasibility/ |archive-date=28 September 2023 |access-date=30 July 2025 |work=TechCrunch}}</ref> The government has said it does not intend to enforce this provision of the act until it becomes "technically feasible" to do so.<ref name=Guest>{{cite magazine|title=Britain Admits Defeat in Controversial Fight to Break Encryption|url=https://www.wired.com/story/britain-admits-defeat-online-safety-bill-encryption/|magazine=Wired|first=Peter|last=Guest|date=6 September 2023|access-date=25 January 2025|archive-date=24 January 2025|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250124081312/https://www.wired.com/story/britain-admits-defeat-online-safety-bill-encryption/|url-status=live}}</ref> The act also obliges technology platforms to introduce systems that will allow users to better [[Internet filter|filter]] out the harmful content they do not want to see.<ref name="HBL">{{cite news |date=28 November 2022 |title=Online Safety Bill: Plan to make big tech remove harmful content axed |url=https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-63782082 |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250513094826/https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-63782082 |archive-date=13 May 2025 |access-date=29 November 2022 |work=BBC News |publisher=}}</ref><ref>{{Cite news |last=Sandle |first=Paul |date=29 November 2022 |title=UK ditches ban on 'legal but harmful' online content in favour of free speech |work=Reuters |url=https://www.reuters.com/world/uk/uk-ditches-ban-legal-harmful-online-content-favour-free-speech-2022-11-28/ |access-date=29 November 2022 |archive-date=29 November 2022 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20221129155408/https://www.reuters.com/world/uk/uk-ditches-ban-legal-harmful-online-content-favour-free-speech-2022-11-28/ |url-status=live }}</ref>

The legislation has drawn criticism both within the UK and overseas from politicians, academics, journalists and human rights organisations, who say that it poses a threat to the [[right to privacy]] and [[freedom of speech]] and expression.<ref name="Messenger 2023" /><ref name=thereg-20240215 /><ref name="Open Rights 2022" /> Supporters of the act say it is [[Think of the children|necessary for child protection]].<ref name="BBC 19-09-2023" />

==Provisions==

===Scope===

Within the scope of the act is any "user-to-user service".  This is defined as an Internet service by means of which content that is generated by a user of the service, or uploaded to or shared on the service by a user of the service, may be read, viewed, heard or otherwise experienced ("encountered") by another user, or other users. Content includes written material or messages, oral communications, photographs, videos, visual images, music and data of any description.<ref name="draft-text">{{Cite web|date=12 May 2021|title=Draft Online Safety Bill|url=https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/985033/Draft_Online_Safety_Bill_Bookmarked.pdf|access-date=15 May 2021}}</ref>

The duty of care applies globally to services with a significant number of United Kingdom users, or which target UK users, or those which are capable of being used in the United Kingdom where there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is a material risk of significant harm.<ref name="draft-text" /> The idea of a duty of care for Internet intermediaries was first proposed in Thompson (2016)<ref>{{Citation |last=Thompson |first=Marcelo |title=Beyond Gatekeeping: The Normative Responsibility of Internet Intermediaries |date=15 October 2015 |ssrn=2683301 |type=SSRN Scholarly Paper |url=https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2683301 |access-date=29 May 2024 |place=Rochester, NY |language=en}}</ref> and made popular in the UK by the work of Woods and Perrin (2019).<ref>{{Cite web |title=Online harm reduction - a statutory duty of care and regulator |url=https://carnegieuktrust.org.uk/publications/online-harm-reduction-a-statutory-duty-of-care-and-regulator/ |access-date=29 May 2024 |website=Carnegie UK Trust |language=en-GB |archive-date=29 May 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240529172305/https://carnegieuktrust.org.uk/publications/online-harm-reduction-a-statutory-duty-of-care-and-regulator/ |url-status=live }}</ref>

===Duties===
The duty of care in the act refers to a number of specific duties to all services within scope:<ref name="draft-text" />

* The illegal content risk assessment duty
* The illegal content duties
* The duty about rights to freedom of expression and privacy
* The duties about reporting and redress 
* The record-keeping and review duties

For services "likely to be accessed by children", adopting the same scope as the [[Age Appropriate Design Code]], two additional duties are imposed:<ref name="draft-text" />

* The children's risk assessment duties 
* The duties to protect children's online safety

For "category 1" services, which will be defined in secondary legislation but are limited to the largest global platforms, there are four further new duties:<ref name="draft-text" />

* The adults' risk assessment duties 
* The duties to protect adults’ online safety
* The duties to protect content of democratic importance 
* The duties to protect journalistic content

===Enforcement powers===
The act empowers [[Ofcom]], the national communications regulator, to block access to particular user-to-user services or search engines from the United Kingdom, including through interventions by [[Internet service provider|internet access providers]] and [[app store]]s. The regulator can also impose, through "service restriction orders", requirements on ancillary services which facilitate the provision of the regulated services.<ref name="TC12-05-21">{{cite news|url=https://techcrunch.com/2021/05/12/uk-publishes-draft-online-safety-bill|last=Lomas|first=Natasha|title=UK publishes draft Online Safety Bill|website=[[TechCrunch]]|date=12 May 2021|accessdate=12 May 2021|archive-date=12 May 2021|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210512140007/https://techcrunch.com/2021/05/12/uk-publishes-draft-online-safety-bill/|url-status=live}}</ref><ref name="Sky-2021"/><ref name="BBC12-05-21">{{cite news|url=https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-57071977|title=Government lays out plans to protect users online|work=[[BBC News]]|last=Wakefield|first=Jane|date=12 May 2021|accessdate=12 May 2021|archive-date=12 May 2021|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210512020234/https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-57071977|url-status=live}}</ref>

The act lists in section 92 as examples (i) services which enable funds to be transferred, (ii) search engines which generate search results displaying or promoting content, and (iii) services which facilitate the display of advertising on a regulated service (for example, an ad server or an ad network). Ofcom must apply to a court for both Access Restriction and Service Restriction Orders.<ref name="draft-text" />

Section 44 of the act also gives the Secretary of State the power to direct Ofcom to modify a draft code of practice for online safety if deemed necessary for reasons of public policy, national security, or public safety. Ofcom must comply with the direction and submit a revised draft to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State may give Ofcom further directions to modify the draft, and once satisfied, must lay the modified draft before Parliament. Additionally, the Secretary of State can remove or obscure information before laying the review statement before Parliament.<ref>{{Cite web |date=18 January 2023 |title=Online Safety Bill (as brought from the Commons) |url=https://bills.parliament.uk/publications/49376/documents/2822 |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20230225121734/https://bills.parliament.uk/publications/49376/documents/2822 |archive-date=25 February 2023}}</ref>

The act contains provisions allowing eligible entities to bring [[super-complaint]]s on behalf of consumers.<ref>{{Cite web |date=25 July 2025 |title=Online Safety Act super-complaints process must not overwhelm Ofcom |url=https://www.pinsentmasons.com/out-law/analysis/online-safety-act-super-complaints-process |access-date=25 July 2025 |website=Pinsent Masons |language=en-GB}}</ref> The process for doing so was set out in regulations in July 2025.<ref>{{Cite legislation UK|type=si|year=2025|number=919|si=The Online Safety Super-Complaints (Eligibility and Procedural Matters) Regulations 2025}}</ref>

===Limitations===
The act has provisions to impose legal requirements ensuring that content removals do not arbitrarily remove or infringe access to what it defines as journalistic content.<ref name="TC12-05-21" /> Large social networks are required to protect "[[democracy|democratically]] important" content, such as user-submitted posts supporting or opposing particular political parties or policies.<ref name="Hern-2021">{{cite news|url=https://www.theguardian.com/media/2021/may/12/uk-to-require-social-media-to-protect-democratically-important-content|title=Online safety bill 'a recipe for censorship', say campaigners|last=Hern|first=Alex|newspaper=[[The Guardian]]|date=12 May 2021|accessdate=12 May 2021|archive-date=14 May 2021|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210514013533/https://www.theguardian.com/media/2021/may/12/uk-to-require-social-media-to-protect-democratically-important-content|url-status=live}}</ref> The government stated that news publishers' own websites, as well as reader comments on such websites, are not within the intended scope of the law.<ref name="TC12-05-21" /><ref name="BBC12-05-21" />

===Age verification===
Section 12 of the act states that service providers have a duty to prevent children from seeing "primary priority content that is harmful to children". This includes pornographic images, and content that encourages, promotes, or provides instructions for [[eating disorder]]s, [[self-harm]], or suicide. The act says that service providers must use [[Age verification system|age verification]] or age estimation technology in order to prevent users from being able to access primary priority content unless they are appropriately-aged: the provision applies to all services that allow categories of primary priority content to be made available, including social networks and [[internet pornography]] services.<ref name="OSA" /><ref>{{Cite news |last=Griffin |first=Andrew |date=24 July 2025 |title=UK porn age verification: How will it work and what will happen to your data? |url=https://www.the-independent.com/tech/uk-porn-age-verification-b2795354.html |url-status=live |archive-url=https://archive.today/20250725233029/https://www.the-independent.com/tech/uk-porn-age-verification-b2795354.html |archive-date=25 July 2025 |access-date=30 July 2025 |work=The Independent}}</ref>

=== Other provisions: criminalising other acts ===
The act adds two new offences to the [[Sexual Offences Act 2003]]: sending images of a person's genitals ([[cyberflashing]]),<ref>{{Cite legislation UK|type=act|year=2023|chapter=50|act=Online Safety Act 2023|section=187}}</ref> or sharing or threatening to share intimate images.<ref>{{Cite legislation UK|type=act|year=2023|chapter=50|act=Online Safety Act 2023|section=188}}</ref> The first conviction for cyberflashing under the new law occurred in March 2024 following a guilty plea.<ref>{{Cite news |last=Grierson |first=Jamie |date=19 March 2024 |title=Court jails first person convicted of cyberflashing in England |url=https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2024/mar/19/court-jails-first-person-convicted-of-cyber-flashing-in-england |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250209115833/https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2024/mar/19/court-jails-first-person-convicted-of-cyber-flashing-in-england |archive-date=9 February 2025 |access-date=11 July 2025 |work=The Guardian |language=en-GB |issn=0261-3077}}</ref><ref>{{Cite news |date=20 March 2024 |title=Cyber-flashing 'not a joke', warns CPS prosecutor |url=https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-essex-68602525 |access-date=11 July 2025 |work=BBC News |language=en-GB |archive-date=12 July 2025 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250712000130/https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-essex-68602525 |url-status=live }}</ref>

The act also updates and extends a number of existing communication offences. The false communications offence contained in section 179 replaces the offence previously found in s127(2)(a) and (b) of the [[Communications Act 2003]].<ref name="s179">{{Cite legislation UK|type=act|year=2023|chapter=50|act=Online Safety Act 2023|section=179}}</ref><ref name="BCP B18.31">{{cite book |title=Blackstone's Criminal Practice 2025 |date=2024 |publisher=Oxford University Press |isbn=9780198924333 |editor1=Ormerod |editor-first=David |edition=35 |at=B18.31 |editor2=Perry |editor-first2=David}}</ref> (The existing s127(1) offence remains in force.)<ref>{{Cite web |last1=Woods |first1=Lorna |last2=Antoniou |first2=Alexandros |date=3 September 2024 |title=Is the Online Safety Act "fit for purpose"? |url=https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/medialse/2024/09/03/is-the-online-safety-act-fit-for-purpose/ |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250113131232/https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/medialse/2024/09/03/is-the-online-safety-act-fit-for-purpose/ |archive-date=13 January 2025 |access-date=30 July 2025 |website=LSE Blogs}}</ref> To be prosecuted under section 179, a defendant must be shown to have ''known'' the information they transmitted to be false, and that they had an intention to cause non-trivial psychological or physical harm to those receiving the message. Peter Coe of Birmingham Law School has suggested these requirements might make it hard to successfully prosecute offenders under this offence as "falsity is often difficult to ascertain", and "the offence's two-pronged ''mens rea,'' combined with the general difficulty in ascertaining falsity and non-trivial harm, and the current lack of clarity over the threshold, will make the offence difficult to prove, particularly in respect of borderline cases, which could further limit the offence's scope".<ref>{{Cite journal |last=Coe |first=Peter |date=1 December 2024 |title=Some thoughts on false information and the Online Safety Act 2023 |journal=Communications Law |volume=29 |issue=4 |pages=143–145 |via=Lexis}}</ref> After the [[2024 Southport stabbings]] and ensuing riots, several individuals were prosecuted for knowingly spreading "[[fake news]]". For example, Dimitrie Stoica was jailed for three months for falsely claiming in a TikTok livestream that he was "running for his life" from rioters in Derby.<ref>{{Cite web |title=Man jailed after fake claim on TikTok |url=https://www.derbyshire.police.uk/news/derbyshire/news/news/south/2024/august/man-jailed-after-fake-claim-on-tiktok-video-that-he-was-running-for-his-life-from-rioters/ |access-date=7 August 2025 |website=www.derbyshire.police.uk |language=en-GB}}</ref>

Section 181 creates an offence of sending a message (via electronic or non-electronic means) that "conveys a threat of death or serious harm".<ref name="BCP 18.35">{{cite book |title=Blackstone's Criminal Practice 2025 |date=2024 |publisher=Oxford University Press |isbn=9780198924333 |editor1=Ormerod |editor-first=David |edition=35 |at=B18.35 |editor2=Perry |editor-first2=David}}</ref> This can be tried summarily or on [[indictment]].<ref name="s181">{{Cite legislation UK|type=act|year=2023|chapter=50|act=Online Safety Act 2023|section=181}}</ref>

Section 183 creates an offence of "sending or showing flashing images electronically" if it is "reasonably foreseeable that an individual with [[epilepsy]] would be among the individuals who would view it", the sender intends to cause that person harm, and they have "no reasonable excuse".<ref name="s183">{{Cite legislation UK|type=act|year=2023|chapter=50|act=Online Safety Act 2023|section=183}}</ref><ref name="BCP B18.37-39">{{cite book |title=Blackstone's Criminal Practice 2025 |date=2024 |publisher=Oxford University Press |isbn=9780198924333 |editor1=Ormerod |editor-first=David |edition=35 |at=B18.37-39 |editor2=Perry |editor-first2=David}}</ref> This is intended to try and prevent "epilepsy trolling".<ref>{{Cite news |date=20 September 2023 |title=Zach's Law: West Yorkshire boy hails victory over online trolls |url=https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-leeds-66866261 |access-date=17 February 2025 |work=BBC News |language=en-GB |archive-date=11 February 2025 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250211092115/https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-leeds-66866261 |url-status=live }}</ref>

Section 184 makes "encouraging or assisting serious self-harm" a criminal offence. This is similar to the offence of encouraging or assisting suicide contained in the [[Suicide Act 1961]].<ref>{{Cite news |last=Adams |first=Charley |date=26 November 2022 |title=Encouraging self-harm to be criminalised in Online Safety Bill |url=https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-63768496 |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250712000129/https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-63768496 |archive-date=12 July 2025 |access-date=17 February 2025 |work=BBC News |language=en-GB}}</ref> The first conviction under this section occurred in July 2025. Tyler Webb used the messaging app [[Telegram (software)|Telegram]] to encourage a woman he had met on a mental health support forum to harm herself and send him pictures of the resulting injuries, and to attempt suicide while he watched on camera.<ref>{{Cite web |last=Carroll |first=Mickey |date=4 July 2025 |title=Tyler Webb sentenced to nine years imprisonment after persuading victim to attempt suicide online |url=https://news.sky.com/story/tyler-webb-sentenced-to-nine-years-imprisonment-after-persuading-victim-to-attempt-suicide-online-13392198 |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250708061325/https://news.sky.com/story/tyler-webb-sentenced-to-nine-years-imprisonment-after-persuading-victim-to-attempt-suicide-online-13392198 |archive-date=8 July 2025 |access-date=11 July 2025 |website=Sky News |language=en}}</ref><ref>{{Cite web |last=Hunt |first=Dan |date=4 July 2025 |title=Tyler Webb: Man who encouraged woman to kill herself sentenced |url=https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cpwqy40wxw1o |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250705135258/https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cpwqy40wxw1o |archive-date=5 July 2025 |access-date=11 July 2025 |website=BBC News |language=en-GB}}</ref>

==Legislative process and timetable==
In 2021, the draft bill was given [[pre-legislative scrutiny]] by a joint committee of Members of the [[House of Commons of the United Kingdom|House of Commons]] and peers from the [[House of Lords]].<ref>{{Cite web|title=Domestic Abuse Bill - Wednesday 17 March 2021|url=https://hansard.parliament.uk/lords/2021-03-17/debates/8FC29754-12FB-4EEC-BC70-678CA00B9DD3/DomesticAbuseBill|access-date=15 May 2021|website=Hansard|language=en|archive-date=15 May 2021|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210515191510/https://hansard.parliament.uk/lords/2021-03-17/debates/8FC29754-12FB-4EEC-BC70-678CA00B9DD3/DomesticAbuseBill|url-status=live}}</ref> The 2021 draft bill included within scope any pornographic site which has functionality to allow for user-to-user services, but those which do not have this functionality, or choose to remove it, were not in scope in the draft published by the government.<ref name="draft-text"/> [[Oliver Dowden]], the [[Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport]], addressed the [[Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee|House of Commons DCMS Select Committee]] to confirm he would consider a proposal during the pre-legislative scrutiny to extend the scope of the Act to all commercial pornographic websites.<ref>{{Cite news |date=18 May 2021 |title=Porn blocker 'missing' from Online Safety Bill prompts concern |url=https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-57143746 |access-date=12 August 2025 |work=BBC News |language=en-GB}}</ref>

Section 212 of the final act repeals part 3 of the [[Digital Economy Act 2017]], which required [[UK Internet age verification system|mandatory age verification]] to access online pornography but was subsequently not enforced by the government.<ref>{{cite news |last=Grant |first=Harriet |date=5 May 2021 |title=UK government faces action over lack of age checks on adult sites |url=https://www.theguardian.com/society/2021/may/05/uk-government-faces-action-over-lack-of-age-checks-on-pornography-websites |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20230603153206/https://www.theguardian.com/society/2021/may/05/uk-government-faces-action-over-lack-of-age-checks-on-pornography-websites |archive-date=3 June 2023 |accessdate=13 May 2021 |newspaper=[[The Guardian]]}}</ref> According to the then government, the Act addresses the major concern expressed by campaigners such as the [[Open Rights Group]] about the risk to user privacy with the Digital Economy Act's requirement for age verification by creating, on services within scope of the legislation, "A duty to have regard to the importance of... protecting users from unwarranted infringements of privacy, when deciding on, and implementing, safety policies and procedures."<ref>{{Cite web|date=13 September 2016|title=Digital Economy Bill Could Lead to Ashley Madison Style Data Breaches|website=Open Rights Group|url=https://www.openrightsgroup.org/press-releases/digital-economy-bill-could-lead-to-ashley-madison-style-data-breaches/|access-date=15 May 2021|archive-date=15 May 2021|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210515191511/https://www.openrightsgroup.org/press-releases/digital-economy-bill-could-lead-to-ashley-madison-style-data-breaches/|url-status=live}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|date=12 May 2021|title=Digital Economy Act 2017 Part 3|url=https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2017/30/part/3/enacted|website=[[gov.uk]]|accessdate=15 May 2021|archive-date=15 May 2021|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210515191510/https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2017/30/part/3/enacted|url-status=live}}</ref><ref name="draft-text" /> In February 2022, the Digital Economy Minister, [[Chris Philp]], announced that the bill would be amended to bring commercial pornographic websites within its scope.<ref>{{cite news |last1=Milmo |first1=Dan |last2=Waterson |first2=Jim |date=8 February 2022 |title=Porn sites in UK will have to check ages in planned update to online safety bill |url=https://www.theguardian.com/society/2022/feb/08/porn-sites-in-uk-will-have-to-check-ages-in-planned-update-to-online-safety-bill |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20220228104041/https://www.theguardian.com/society/2022/feb/08/porn-sites-in-uk-will-have-to-check-ages-in-planned-update-to-online-safety-bill |archive-date=28 February 2022 |access-date=30 July 2025 |newspaper=The Guardian}}</ref>

Civil liberties organisations such as [[Big Brother Watch]] and the [[Open Rights Group]] criticised the bill for its proposals to restrain the publication of lawful speech that was otherwise deemed harmful, which may amount to [[censorship]] or the "silencing of marginalised voices and unpopular views".<ref name="Sky-2021">{{Cite news |date=12 May 2021 |title=Tech firms could face fines over harmful content in government's new online safety bill |url=https://news.sky.com/story/gov-says-new-online-safety-bill-will-keep-people-safe-but-not-everyone-is-convinced-12303980 |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210512151609/https://news.sky.com/story/gov-says-new-online-safety-bill-will-keep-people-safe-but-not-everyone-is-convinced-12303980 |archive-date=12 May 2021 |access-date=18 May 2021 |website=Sky News}}</ref><ref name="Hern-2021" /><ref>{{Cite web|last=Landi|first=Martyn|date=13 May 2021|title=Online Safety Bill labelled 'state-backed censorship' by campaigners|url=https://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/safety-ofcom-oliver-dowden-government-prime-minister-b934893.html|access-date=18 May 2021|website=www.standard.co.uk|archive-date=18 May 2021|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210518080319/https://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/safety-ofcom-oliver-dowden-government-prime-minister-b934893.html|url-status=live}}</ref> As a result, in November 2022, measures intended to require big technology platforms to take down "legal but harmful" materials were replaced with the requirement to provide systems to avoid viewing such content.<ref name="HBL" />

In September 2023, during the third reading in the Lords, [[Stephen Parkinson, Baron Parkinson of Whitley Bay|Lord Parkinson]] presented a ministerial statement from the government stating that the controversial powers allowing [[Ofcom]] to break [[end-to-end encryption]] would not be used immediately. This followed statements from several tech firms, including [[Signal (software)|Signal]], suggesting they would withdraw from the UK market rather than weaken their encryption. Nevertheless, the provisions pertaining to end-to-end encryption weakening were not removed from the Act and [[Ofcom]] can at any time issue notices requiring the breaking of end-to-end encryption technology.<ref name="yahoo" />

==Reception==
Supporters of the act have said it is necessary for online [[child protection]].<ref name="BBC 19-09-2023">{{cite news |title=Braverman and Facebook clash over private message plans |url=https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-66854622 |access-date=20 September 2023 |work=BBC News |date=19 September 2023}}</ref> Critics have said the act grants the [[Government of the United Kingdom]] extensive powers to regulate speech, set enforcement priorities, and pressure platforms into removing content without judicial oversight.<ref name="Open Rights 2022" /><ref name="Article 19" /><ref name=thereg-20240215 />

=== Academic responses ===
[[Alan Woodward (computer scientist)|Alan Woodward]], a cybersecurity expert at the [[University of Surrey]], described the act's surveillance provisions as "technically dangerous and ethically questionable", stating that the government's approach could make the internet less safe, not more. He added that the act makes [[mass surveillance]] "almost an inevitability" as [[security forces]] would be liable to [[mission creep]], using the justification of "exceptional circumstances" to extend searches beyond their original remit.<ref name=Guest/> Elena Abrusci, a scholar at [[Brunel University of London|Brunel Law School]], suggests that the OSA provides adequate legal basis for service providers to remove illegal content, but does not adequately protect users from [[disinformation]] and online harassment, which is necessary for ensuring political participation.<ref>{{Cite journal |last=Abrusci |first=Elena |date=2 July 2024 |title=The UK Online Safety Act, the EU Digital Services Act and online disinformation: is the right to political participation adequately protected?* |url=https://doi.org/10.1080/17577632.2024.2425551 |journal=Journal of Media Law |volume=16 |issue=2 |pages=440–467 |doi=10.1080/17577632.2024.2425551 |issn=1757-7632}}</ref>

=== Charities and human rights organisations ===
The [[National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children]] (NSPCC) said the act's passage was "a momentous day for children" and that it would help prevent abuse.<ref name="NSPCC 2023">{{Cite web|url=https://www.nspcc.org.uk/about-us/news-opinion/2023/2023-09-19-the-online-safety-bill-has-been-passed-in-a-momentous-day-for-children/|title=The Online Safety Bill has been passed in "a momentous day for children"|date=19 September 2023|website=NSPCC|access-date=28 October 2023|archive-date=28 October 2023|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20231028151237/https://www.nspcc.org.uk/about-us/news-opinion/2023/2023-09-19-the-online-safety-bill-has-been-passed-in-a-momentous-day-for-children/|url-status=live}}</ref> The [[Samaritans (charity)|Samaritans]], which had lobbied to expand the Bill's reach to protect vulnerable users, also lent the final act its cautious support. The organisation said it was a step forward, but criticised the government for not fulfilling its ambition to make the United Kingdom the "safest place to be online".<ref>{{cite web | url=https://www.samaritans.org/news/online-safety-bill-the-ins-and-outs/ | title=Online Safety Bill: The ins and outs }}</ref><ref>{{cite web |date=19 September 2023 |title=Samaritans responds to the passing of the Online Safety Bill today |url=https://www.samaritans.org/news/samaritans-response-to-the-passing-online-safety-bill/ |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20231028151236/https://www.samaritans.org/news/samaritans-response-to-the-passing-online-safety-bill/ |archive-date=28 October 2023 |access-date=28 October 2023 |website=Samaritans}}</ref>

British human rights organisation [[Article 19]] warned that the act is "an extremely complex and incoherent piece of legislation" and "fails in effectively addressing the threat to human rights" such as freedom of expression and access to information.<ref name="Article 19">{{Cite web |date=25 April 2022 |title=UK: Online Safety Bill is a serious threat to human rights online |url=https://www.article19.org/resources/uk-online-safety-bill-serious-threat-to-human-rights-online/ |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20230501173604/https://www.article19.org/resources/uk-online-safety-bill-serious-threat-to-human-rights-online/ |archive-date=1 May 2023 |access-date=1 May 2023 |website=ARTICLE 19 |language=en-US}}</ref> Mark Johnson, Legal and Policy Officer at [[Big Brother Watch]], said it was a "censor's charter" that undermines the right to freedom of expression and privacy.<ref name="Open Rights 2022">{{Cite web |date=16 November 2022 |title=Online Safety Bill a threat to human rights warn campaigners |url=https://www.openrightsgroup.org/press-releases/online-safety-bill-a-threat-to-human-rights-warn-campaigners/ |access-date=1 May 2023 |website=Open Rights Group |language=en}}</ref> 

In February 2024, the [[European Court of Human Rights]] ruled that requiring degraded end-to-end encryption "cannot be regarded as necessary in a democratic society" and was incompatible with [[Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights]].<ref name=thereg-20240215>{{cite news |url=https://www.theregister.com/2024/02/15/echr_backdoor_encryption/ |title=European Court of Human Rights declares backdoored encryption is illegal |last=Claburn |first=Thomas |website=The Register |date=15 February 2024 |access-date=18 February 2024 |archive-date=18 February 2024 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20240218100648/https://www.theregister.com/2024/02/15/echr_backdoor_encryption/ |url-status=live }}</ref>

=== Industry responses ===
A number of websites have stated that they would close as a result of the act. London Fixed Gear and Single Speed, a forum for bicycle enthusiasts, announced their closure citing the high cost of legal compliance, along with Microcosm, a provider of forum hosting for non-commercial, non-profit communities.<ref>{{Cite news |last=Naughton |first=John |date=12 January 2025 |title=Note to No 10: one speed doesn't fit all when it comes to online safety |url=https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2025/jan/12/note-to-no-10-one-speed-doesnt-fit-all-when-it-comes-to-online-safety |access-date=11 July 2025 |work=The Guardian |language=en-GB |issn=0261-3077}}</ref><ref>{{Cite news |last=Masnick |first=Mike |date=20 December 2024 |title=Death Of A Forum: How The UK's Online Safety Act Is Killing Communities |url=https://www.techdirt.com/2024/12/20/death-of-a-forum-how-the-uks-online-safety-act-is-killing-communities/ |url-status=live |archive-url=https://archive.today/20241222194629/https://www.techdirt.com/2024/12/20/death-of-a-forum-how-the-uks-online-safety-act-is-killing-communities/ |archive-date=22 December 2024 |access-date=11 July 2025 |website=Techdirt |language=en-US}}</ref> Some sites have instead blocked UK users, including the [[alt-tech]] [[social networking service]] [[Gab (social network)|Gab]]<ref>{{Cite web |title=Gab - UK Access Restricted |url=https://uk.gab.com/ |access-date=14 August 2025 |website=uk.gab.com}}</ref><ref>{{cite news |last1=Mak |first1=Aaron |title=The UK's new tech law triggers upheaval |url=https://www.politico.com/newsletters/digital-future-daily/2025/07/29/the-uks-new-tech-law-triggers-upheaval-00481803 |access-date=15 August 2025 |work=[[Politico]] |date=29 July 2025 |quote=Gab, a U.S.-based platform that hosts Nazi and other extremist content, has gone completely dark in the UK to avoid financial and criminal penalties under the safety act}}</ref> and [[Gen AI]] platform [[Civitai|Civit.ai]].<ref>{{Cite web |title=🚫 Access Restricted for UK Visitors |url=https://civitai.com/region-blocked |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250729175604/https://civitai.com/region-blocked |archive-date=29 July 2025 |access-date=14 August 2025 |website=civitai.com |language=en |url-status=live }}</ref>

Major technology firms have raised concerns over the act's implications for user privacy and encryption. [[Apple Inc.]] called the legislation a "serious threat" to [[end-to-end encryption]], warning that it could force the company to weaken security features designed to protect users from surveillance.<ref name="Messenger 2023">{{Cite web |date=28 June 2023 |first=Alexander |last=Messenger |title=Apple calls UK's Online Safety Bill a "serious threat" to end-to-end encryption |url=https://www.24zero.net/apple-calls-uks-online-safety-bill-a-serious-threat-to-end-to-end-encryption/ |access-date=29 June 2023 |website=24zero |language=en-US}}</ref> [[Meta Platforms]] similarly stated that it would rather have its [[WhatsApp]] and [[Facebook Messenger]] services blocked in the UK than weaken encryption standards.<ref>{{cite news |title=WhatsApp would not remove end-to-end encryption for UK law, says chief |url=https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/mar/09/whatsapp-end-to-end-encryption-online-safety-bill |access-date=5 August 2025 |work=The Guardian |date=9 March 2023}}</ref>

Some websites and apps stated they would introduce [[age verification system]]s for users in response to a 25 July 2025 deadline set by Ofcom.<ref>{{Cite web |date=26 June 2025 |title=Age checks for online safety – what you need to know as a user |url=https://www.ofcom.org.uk/online-safety/protecting-children/age-checks-for-online-safety--what-you-need-to-know-as-a-user |access-date=20 July 2025 |website=Ofcom |language=en |archive-date=16 July 2025 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250716090242/https://www.ofcom.org.uk/online-safety/protecting-children/age-checks-for-online-safety--what-you-need-to-know-as-a-user |url-status=live }}</ref> These include pornographic websites, but also other websites and services such as networks [[Bluesky]] (verification via [[Kids Web Services]] (KWS)), [[Discord]], [[Tinder (app)|Tinder]], [[Bumble]], [[Feeld]], [[Grindr]], [[Hinge (app)|Hinge]], [[Reddit]] (verification via [[Persona (age verification service)|Persona]]), [[Twitter|X]], and [[Spotify]].<ref name="Cole Spotify 2025">{{cite news |last1=Cole |first1=Samantha |title=Spotify Is Forcing Users to Undergo Face Scanning to Access Explicit Content |url=https://www.404media.co/spotify-uk-age-check-verification-yoti/ |access-date=3 August 2025 |work=404 Media |date=30 July 2025 |ref=Cole Spotify 2025 |archive-url=https://archive.today/20250730160610/https://www.404media.co/spotify-uk-age-check-verification-yoti/ |archive-date=30 July 2025 |url-status=live}}</ref><ref name="Brodkin-2025">{{cite web |last1=Brodkin |first1=Jon |title=Reddit's UK users must now prove they're 18 to view adult content |url=https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2025/07/reddit-starts-verifying-ages-of-uk-users-to-comply-with-child-safety-law/ |website=Ars Technica |access-date=24 July 2025 |language=en |date=14 July 2025 |archive-date=16 July 2025 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250716222808/https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2025/07/reddit-starts-verifying-ages-of-uk-users-to-comply-with-child-safety-law/ |url-status=live }}</ref><ref>{{Cite news |last=Carroll |first=Mickey |date=26 June 2025 |title=Major pornography sites to introduce 'robust' age verification for UK users |url=https://news.sky.com/story/major-pornography-sites-to-introduce-robust-age-verification-for-uk-users-13388827 |access-date=11 July 2025 |website=Sky News |language=en}}{{pb}}{{cite web |last1=Goodwins |first1=Rupert |title=Selling your digital soul to use Bluesky's DMs is the law |url=https://www.theregister.com/2025/07/21/opinion_column_age_verification/ |website=[[The Register]] |access-date=24 July 2025 |language=en}}{{pb}}{{Cite web |last=Roth |first=Emma |date=10 July 2025 |title=Bluesky is rolling out age verification in the UK |url=https://www.theverge.com/news/704468/bluesky-age-verification-uk-online-safety-act |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250711084433/https://www.theverge.com/news/704468/bluesky-age-verification-uk-online-safety-act |archive-date=11 July 2025 |access-date=11 July 2025 |website=The Verge |language=en-US}}{{pb}}{{Cite web |title=Age Assurance on X |url=https://help.x.com/en/rules-and-policies/age-assurance |access-date=24 July 2025 |website=help.x.com |language=en |archive-date=26 July 2025 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250726005918/https://help.x.com/en/rules-and-policies/age-assurance |url-status=live }}{{pb}}{{Cite web |title=New internet rules come into force this week - here's what will change |url=https://news.sky.com/story/new-internet-rules-come-into-force-this-week-heres-what-will-change-13400034 |access-date=24 July 2025 |website=Sky News |language=en |archive-date=26 July 2025 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250726013838/https://news.sky.com/story/new-internet-rules-come-into-force-this-week-heres-what-will-change-13400034 |url-status=live }}{{pb}}{{Cite web |last=Iovine |first=Anna |date=23 July 2025 |title=Dating apps to add age checks in the UK |url=https://mashable.com/article/feeld-tinder-bumble-hinge-age-checks-uk |url-status=live |archive-url=https://archive.today/20250730093527/https://mashable.com/article/feeld-tinder-bumble-hinge-age-checks-uk |archive-date=30 July 2025 |access-date=30 July 2025 |website=Mashable |language=en}}</ref>

In February 2026, SimpleMedia, an editorial website for sex workers, described the legislation as a "financial blow" for sex workers. Significant losses of earnings were reported due to loss of access to advertising, and the psychological barrier for potential clients who do not wish to give their details to adult sites.<ref>{{Cite web |last=Wallace |first=Megan |date=2026-02-11 |title=How the Online Safety Act is impacting sex work in the UK |url=https://media.simpleescort.com/uk/legality-rights/how-the-online-safety-act-is-impacting-sexwork/ |access-date=2026-02-19 |website=SimpleMedia |language=en}}</ref>

=== Political responses ===
In response to criticisms of the act, Prime Minister [[Sir Keir Starmer]] has said it is necessary to protect children from online content such as "suicide sites".<ref>{{Cite web |last=Parker |first=Emily |date=28 July 2025 |title=UK government responds after 350,000 demand law is repealed |url=https://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/uk-news/uk-government-responds-after-350000-32154668 |access-date=12 August 2025 |website=Manchester Evening News |language=en}}</ref> The [[National Crime Agency]], an agency under the [[Home Office]], also insisted the legislation is necessary to safeguard children from online harms.<ref name="BBC 19-09-2023" />

In August 2024, the [[Premiership of Keir Starmer|Starmer government]] indicated it would review the act to consider strengthening its provisions.<ref>{{cite news |first=Martin |last=Coulter |title=UK revisits social media regulation after far-right riots |url=https://www.reuters.com/world/uk/uk-revisits-online-safety-act-after-far-right-riots-2024-08-09/ |work=Reuters |date=9 August 2024}}</ref> In the aftermath of the [[2024 United Kingdom riots|2024 UK riots]], London Mayor [[Sadiq Khan]] criticised the legislation as "not fit for purpose" and advocated for its strengthening.<ref>{{cite news |title=Online Safety Act not fit for purpose after far-right riots, says Sadiq Khan |url=https://www.theguardian.com/media/article/2024/aug/08/online-safety-act-not-fit-for-purpose-far-right-riots-sadiq-khan |work=The Guardian |date=8 August 2024}}</ref> 

[[Reform UK]] leader [[Nigel Farage]], one of the bill's most vocal opponents, has called the act "borderline [[dystopia]]n" and said he would repeal it if elected to government.<ref>{{cite web |last1=Walker |first1=Peter |date=28 July 2025 |title=Reform UK vows to repeal 'borderline dystopian' Online Safety Act |url=https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2025/jul/28/reform-uk-vows-to-repeal-borderline-dystopian-online-safety-act |url-status=live |archive-url=https://archive.today/20250728181258/https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2025/jul/28/reform-uk-vows-to-repeal-borderline-dystopian-online-safety-act |archive-date=28 July 2025 |access-date=30 July 2025 |website=The Guardian}}</ref> Fellow Reform leader [[Zia Yusuf]] described the legislation as "an assault on freedom".<ref>{{cite web |last1=Yusuf |first1=Zia |date=26 July 2025 |title=The Online Safety Act is an assault on freedom |url=https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2025/07/26/the-online-safety-act-is-an-assault-on-freedom/ |url-status=live |archive-url=https://archive.today/20250726233704/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2025/07/26/the-online-safety-act-is-an-assault-on-freedom/ |archive-date=26 July 2025 |access-date=29 July 2025 |website=[[The Daily Telegraph|The Telegraph]]}}</ref> Then Science Secretary [[Peter Kyle]] responded to the comments made by Farage by stating that Farage was "on the side of sex offenders like [[Jimmy Savile]]". When Farage requested an apology, Kyle reiterated his position and stated that, "If you want to overturn the Online Safety Act you are on the side of predators. It is as simple as that."<ref>{{Cite web |date=29 July 2025|title=Nigel Farage urges minister to apologise for Jimmy Savile online safety claim|url=https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cgery3eeqzxo|access-date=29 July 2025|website=BBC News|language=en-GB}}</ref> This stance was widely derided online,<ref name="telegraph-20250731">{{cite news |last=Field |first=Matthew |date=31 July 2025 |title=The online stunt that shows how Britain's Tech Secretary is under fire |url=https://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2025/07/31/tech-secretary-peter-kyle-under-pressure-as-online-safety-a/ |url-access=subscription |access-date=10 August 2025 |website=The Telegraph |location=London}}</ref> and received criticism from U.S. politicians and technology entrepreneurs.<ref name="sky-20250729">{{cite news |last=Baker |first=Tim |date=29 July 2025 |title=Trump ally Representative Jim Jordan to criticise Online Safety Act in meeting with Technology Secretary Peter Kyle |url=https://news.sky.com/story/trump-ally-representative-jim-jordan-to-criticise-online-safety-act-in-meeting-with-technology-secretary-peter-kyle-13403544 |access-date=10 August 2025 |work=Sky News}}</ref><ref name="ft-20250808">{{cite news |last1=Gross |first1=Anna |last2=Bradshaw |first2=Tim |date=8 August 2025 |title=Marc Andreessen complains to Downing Street about Online Safety Act and UK tech minister |url=https://www.ft.com/content/09c88dde-687e-47c7-ba9d-7ad5048e2bc7 |url-access=subscription |access-date=10 August 2025 |newspaper=Financial Times}}</ref> 

The [[government of Jersey]] will not enforce the law in the territory, citing "inadequacies" in the legislation. There were early objections from the Jersey government that the law did not include a permissive extent clause to enable it to join in on enforcement, but acknowledged that the failure to include such a clause "in hindsight, might be a good thing". The territory will instead develop its own legislation for online safety.<ref>{{cite web |last1=Jeune |first1=James |title=Jersey not "hooking in" to UK Online Safety Act "might be a good thing" |url=https://jerseyeveningpost.com/news/2025/08/06/jersey-going-its-own-way-with-online-safety-legislation-in-hindsight-it-might-be-a-good-thing/ |website=Jersey Evening Post |date=6 August 2025}}</ref>

=== Public responses ===
Following the enactment of this law, there was a significant rise in downloads of [[VPN service]]s by users in the UK, since these can circumvent age verification requirements by routing traffic through another country without such regulations.<ref>{{Cite web |date=28 July 2025 |title=VPNs top App Store charts as UK age verification kicks in |url=https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cn72ydj70g5o |access-date=29 July 2025 |website=BBC News |language=en-GB}}</ref> Some users had also successfully bypassed photo-based age verification services, such as Persona, using images of characters from the video game ''[[Death Stranding]]''.<ref>{{cite web |last1=Gil |first1=Bruce |title='Death Stranding' Is Helping UK Users Bypass Age Verification Laws |url=https://gizmodo.com/death-stranding-is-helping-uk-users-bypass-age-verification-laws-2000635584 |website=Gizmodo |date=28 July 2025 |access-date=30 July 2025}}</ref> A petition calling for the repeal of the law attracted over 500,000 signatures on the [[UK Parliament petitions website]].<ref>{{cite news |last1=Gross |first1=Jenny |title=Britain Forces Porn Sites to Get Serious on 'Age-Gating' |url=https://www.nytimes.com/2025/08/07/technology/uk-porn-age-verification.html |access-date=11 August 2025 |work=The New York Times |date=7 August 2025 |archive-url=https://archive.today/20250807191720/https://www.nytimes.com/2025/08/07/technology/uk-porn-age-verification.html#selection-501.0-501.56 |archive-date=7 August 2025 |quote=More than 500,000 people have signed a petition to repeal the Online Safety Act}}</ref> This was debated in Parliament on 15 December 2025.<ref>{{Cite web |title=Westminster Hall - Monday 15 December 2025 |url=https://parliamentlive.tv/Event/Index/e2268880-809d-4a80-96a2-fe7ab799c124 |access-date=17 December 2025 |website=Parliamentlive.tv}}</ref>

=== Wikipedia responses ===
{{Wikisource|Wikimedia Foundation v Secretary of State for Science, Innovation and Technology (2025, EWHC)}}
Public interest platforms such as [[Wikipedia]] have also raised strong objections, suggesting that the legislation risks undermining non-profit and community-governed websites. [[Rebecca MacKinnon]] of the [[Wikimedia Foundation]] said the act was "harsh" and failed to distinguish between commercial tech giants and public knowledge projects.<ref name="BBC-News-2023">{{Cite news |date=17 January 2023 |title=Wikipedia criticises 'harsh' new Online Safety Bill plans |language=en-GB |work=BBC News |url=https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-64285220 |access-date=3 July 2023}}</ref> Both the Foundation and [[Wikimedia UK]] have rejected calls to implement age verification or identity checks, citing concerns about [[data minimisation]], privacy, and editorial independence.<ref name="BBC 28042023">{{Cite news |date=28 April 2023 |title=Wikipedia will not perform Online Safety Bill age checks |url=https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-65388255 |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20230501203750/https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-65388255 |archive-date=1 May 2023 |access-date=1 May 2023 |work=BBC News |language=en-GB}}</ref><ref>{{Cite news |last=Milmo |first=Dan |date=28 April 2023 |title=UK readers may lose access to Wikipedia amid online safety bill requirements |url=https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2023/apr/28/uk-readers-may-lose-access-to-wikipedia-amid-online-safety-bill-requirements |url-status=live |archive-url=https://archive.today/20230430120738/https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2023/apr/28/uk-readers-may-lose-access-to-wikipedia-amid-online-safety-bill-requirements |archive-date=30 April 2023 |access-date=3 July 2023 |work=The Guardian |language=en-GB |issn=0261-3077}}</ref> In June 2023, they issued an open letter urging lawmakers to exempt public interest platforms from the act's scope.<ref name="Isles 2023">{{Cite web |last=Iles |first=Natasha |date=29 June 2023 |title=Open call by UK civil society to exempt public interest projects from the Online Safety Bill |url=https://wikimedia.org.uk/2023/06/online-safety-bill-open-letter/ |access-date=3 July 2023 |website=Wikimedia UK}}</ref><ref>{{Cite web |last=Black |first=Damien |date=30 June 2023 |title=Wikimedia launches petition against UK Online Safety Bill |url=https://cybernews.com/news/wikimedia-petition-uk-online-safety-bill/ |access-date=3 July 2023 |website=Cybernews |archive-date=2 July 2023 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20230702075627/https://cybernews.com/news/wikimedia-petition-uk-online-safety-bill/ |url-status=live }}</ref>

In May 2025, the Wikimedia Foundation launched a [[Judicial review in English law|judicial review]] against the potential designation of Wikipedia as a "category one" service under the act, which would subject the site to the most stringent requirements.<ref>{{Cite news |last=Milmo |first=Dan |date=8 May 2025 |title=Wikipedia challenging UK law it says exposes it to 'manipulation and vandalism' |url=https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/may/08/wikipedia-challenging-uk-law-it-says-exposes-it-to-manipulation-and-vandalism |access-date=12 May 2025 |work=The Guardian |language=en-GB |issn=0261-3077}}</ref> The foundation has warned that complying with the law would compromise Wikipedia's open editing model and invite state-driven censorship or manipulation. ''[[The Daily Telegraph]]'' reported in July 2025 that Wikipedia may restrict access for UK users if the government insists on full compliance.<ref>{{cite news |last1=Field |first1=Matthew |date=23 July 2025 |title=Wikipedia threatens to limit UK access to website |url=https://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2025/07/23/wikipedia-threatens-limit-access-website-britain/ |url-status=live |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20250726124625/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2025/07/23/wikipedia-threatens-limit-access-website-britain/ |archive-date=26 July 2025 |access-date=28 July 2025 |work=[[The Daily Telegraph]]}}</ref> The [[High Court of Justice]] granted permission for judicial review but rejected the challenge in August 2025,<ref name="BBC 11 August 2025" >{{cite news | title = Wikipedia loses challenge against Online Safety Act verification rules | url = https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cjr11qqvvwlo.amp | work = BBC News | date = 11 August 2025 |language=en-gb| quote = In particular the foundation is concerned the extra duties required - if Wikipedia was classed as Category 1 - would mean it would have to verify the identity of its contributors, undermining their privacy and safety. The only way it could avoid being classed as Category 1 would be to cut the number of people in the UK who could access the online encyclopaedia by about three-quarters, or disable key functions on the site.}}</ref> stating that Wikipedia was not yet designated a category one service, but that the foundation could rechallenge the ruling if it is designated as such.<ref>{{Cite web |last=Brodkin |first=Jon |date=11 August 2025 |title=Wikipedia loses UK Safety Act challenge, worries it will have to verify user IDs |url=https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2025/08/wikipedia-loses-uk-safety-act-challenge-worries-it-will-have-to-verify-user-ids/ |access-date=11 August 2025 |website=Ars Technica |language=en}}</ref> The following month, the foundation said it would not appeal the court's decision, and that it would monitor how the court's guidance is followed, and how Wikipedia's status is protected.<ref>{{Cite web |last= |first= |date=12 September 2025 |title=Wikimedia Foundation Challenges UK Online Safety Act Regulations |url=https://wikimediafoundation.org/news/2025/09/12/wikimedia-foundation-challenges-uk-online-safety-act-regulations/ |access-date=16 September 2025 |website=Wikimedia Foundation |language=en-US}}</ref>

=== U.S. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices ===
The [[U.S. Department of State]] [[Country Reports on Human Rights Practices|Human Rights Practices report]] for 2024, published in August 2025, criticised the Online Safety Act as a hazard to the [[freedom of the press]] because it pressed U.S. social media platforms to "censor speech deemed misinformation or 'hate speech'".<ref name=cityam-20250814>{{cite news |url=https://www.cityam.com/peter-kyle-defends-uk-free-speech-record-after-us-report-attacks-online-safety-act/ |title=Peter Kyle defends UK free speech record after US report attacks Online Safety Act |last=Koopman |first=Saskia |newspaper=City A.M. |date=14 August 2025 |access-date=3 September 2025}}</ref><ref name=state-20250812>{{cite web |url=https://www.state.gov/reports/2024-country-reports-on-human-rights-practices/united-kingdom/ |title=2024 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: United Kingdom |publisher=U.S. Department of State |date=12 August 2025 |access-date=3 September 2025}}</ref>

== Enforcement ==
In August 2025, Ofcom fined anonymous [[imageboard]] [[4chan]] £20,000 for alleged non-compliance with the Online Safety Act, with additional fines to increase at £100 per day.<ref>{{Cite web |last=Martin |first=Alexander |title=UK fines 4chan over noncompliance with Online Safety Act |url=https://therecord.media/4chan-fined-ofcom-uk-online-safety-act |access-date=17 December 2025 |website=The Record |language=en}}</ref> Informed of the impending fine, a lawyer for 4chan responded, "4chan has broken no laws in the United States. My client will not pay any penalty."<ref>{{Cite web |last=Brodkin |first=Jon |date=22 August 2025 |title=4chan refuses to pay UK Online Safety Act fines, asks Trump admin to intervene |url=https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2025/08/4chan-refuses-to-pay-uk-online-safety-act-fines-asks-trump-admin-to-intervene/ |access-date=17 December 2025 |website=Ars Technica |language=en}}</ref>

In November 2025, Ofcom fined Itai Tech, a company that runs a site that uses [[artificial intelligence]] to make the subjects of uploaded photographs appear nude, £50,000 for allegedly not having sufficiently rigorous [[Age verification system|age verification]], plus £5,000 for not responding to information requests.<ref>{{Cite web |last=Saker-Clark |first=Henry |date=20 November 2025 |title=AI nudification site hit with £50,000 fine over age check failures |url=https://uk.finance.yahoo.com/news/ai-nudification-hit-50-000-134521374.html |access-date=17 December 2025 |website=Yahoo! Finance UK}}</ref>

In December 2025, Ofcom fined AVS Group, a [[Belize]]-based company that runs [[Internet pornography|adult websites]], £1{{Spaces}}million, also for alleged lack of age checks, plus £50,000 for not responding to information requests.<ref>{{Cite news |last=Milmo |first=Dan |date=4 December 2025 |title=Pornography company fined £1m by Ofcom for not having strong enough age checks |url=https://www.theguardian.com/society/2025/dec/04/pornography-site-fined-1m-for-not-having-strong-age-checks-required-in-new-uk-law |access-date=17 December 2025 |work=The Guardian |language=en-GB |issn=0261-3077}}</ref>

In March 2026, Ofcom fined 4chan another £520,000 for alleged non-compliance. A lawyer for the company responded to the demand with a cartoon-styled AI image of a hamster.<ref>{{Cite web |last=Kleinman |first=Zoe |date=2026-03-19 |title=4Chan responds to £520,000 Ofcom fine with AI picture of hamster |url=https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c624330lg1ko |access-date=2026-03-20 |website=BBC |language=en-GB}}</ref>

== See also ==
* [[Children's Code]], age-related UK regulation of digital services since 2020
* [[Online age verification in the United Kingdom]]
* [[Kids Online Safety Act]], similar legislation in the United States
* [[Online Safety Amendment]], a similar law passed in Australia in 2024
* [[Chat Control]], proposed legislation in the European Union
* [[Social media age verification laws in the United States]]
* [[Digital Services Act|EU Digital Service Act]]

== Notes ==
{{Notelist}}

== References ==
{{reflist}}

== External links ==
* {{UK-LEG}}
* {{UK-LEG|asmade=yes}}
* [https://www.ofcom.org.uk/online-safety/illegal-and-harmful-content/guide-for-services Ofcom's Guide for services: complying with the Online Safety Act]
* [https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/985033/Draft_Online_Safety_Bill_Bookmarked.pdf Draft Online Safety Bill]
* [https://committees.parliament.uk/committee/534/draft-online-safety-bill-joint-committee/ Joint Committee on the Draft Online Safety Bill]
* [https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/online-safety-act Online Safety Act] at [[Gov.uk]]

{{Censorship and websites}}
{{UK legislation}}
{{Authority control}}

[[Category:United Kingdom Acts of Parliament 2023]]
[[Category:Mass media regulation]]
[[Category:Social media]]
[[Category:Internet censorship in the United Kingdom]]
[[Category:Privacy controversies]]
[[Category:United Kingdom tort law]]
[[Category:Data laws of the United Kingdom]]
[[Category:Child online safety laws]]
[[Category:Encryption debate]]
[[Category:Freedom of speech in the United Kingdom]]
[[Category:Political repression in the United Kingdom]]
[[Category:Constitutional laws of the United Kingdom]]
[[Category:Sentencing (law)]]
[[Category:Wikimedia Foundation litigation]]
[[Category:Keir Starmer controversies]]
[[Category:Internet censorship in Europe]]
[[Category:Internet-related controversies]]